Gather feedback on proposal to consolidate dangerous permissions and introduce a new Jennkins.CONFIGURE permission (#2)
mikecirioli/jep: jep/401/README.adoc

//
//
// Uncomment if there is an associated placeholder JIRA issue.
//| JIRA
//| :bulb: https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/browse/JENKINS-nnnnn[JENKINS-nnnnn] :bulb:
//
//
// Uncomment if discussion will occur in forum other than jenkinsci-dev@ mailing list.
//| Discussions-To
//| :bulb: Link to where discussion and final status announcement will occur :bulb:
//
//
// Uncomment if this JEP depends on one or more other JEPs.
//| Requires
//| :bulb: JEP-NUMBER, JEP-NUMBER... :bulb:
//
//
// Uncomment and fill if this JEP is rendered obsolete by a later JEP
//| Superseded-By
//| :bulb: JEP-NUMBER :bulb:
//
//
// Uncomment when this JEP status is set to Accepted, Rejected or Withdrawn.
//| Resolution
//| :bulb: Link to relevant post in the jenkinsci-dev@ mailing list archives :bulb:

|===

== Abstract

[TIP]
====
Give a short (200 word) description of the technical issue addressed.

* Use present tense - describe what the proposal "does" (as if it were already done), not what it will do.
* Do not go into technical details and instead put those in the Specification section.
* Do not talk about history or why this needs to be done. Instead, add the history to the Motivation section.
====

> The permission types `Jenkins.RUN_SCRIPTS`, `Jenkins.CONFIGURE_UPDATECENTER`, and `Jenkins.UPLOAD_PLUGINS` provide a false sense of security, as a user is able to escalate this limited privilege to `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`.  These permissions are being marked as `@Deprecated` and are now consolidated as `Jenkins.Administer`.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The permission types `Jenkins.RUN_SCRIPTS`, `Jenkins.CONFIGURE_UPDATECENTER`, and `Jenkins.UPLOAD_PLUGINS` provide a false sense of security, as a user is able to escalate this limited privilege to `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`.  These permissions are being marked as `@Deprecated` and are now consolidated as `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`.  
```

> A new permission type, `Jenkins.CONFIGURE` (implied by `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`) has been created for actions that allow for the management of Jenkins configuration items that do not require `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`.  This new perimssion is used to create a clear separation between settings that impact the entirety of a Jenkins instance (particularly with regards to security) and those that can be used to manage other aspects of an installation. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new permission type, `Jenkins.CONFIGURE` (implied by `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`) has been created for actions that allow for the management of Jenkins configuration items that do not require `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`.  This new permission is used to create a clear separation between settings that impact the entirety of a Jenkins instance (particularly with regards to security) and those that can be used to manage other aspects of an installation. 
```

but please please please use one AsciiDoc line per sentence or major phrase

== Specification

[TIP]
====
Provide a detailed specification of what is being proposed.
Be as technical and detailed as needed to allow new or existing Jenkins developers
to reasonably understand the scope/impact of an implementation.

* Use present tense - describe what the proposal "does" (as if it were already done), not what it will do.
* Do not discuss alternative designs that were rejected - those belong in the Reasoning section.
* Avoid in-depth discussion or justification of design choices - that belongs in the Reasoning section.
====

[]
====
Angelique - need to add additional info about Jenkins.READ?
====

> The following permission types are now marked as `@Deprecated` and `@Restricted(NoExternalUse.class)`:

Reviewer 2: This is not what `@Restricted` is for, at all. If you want to deprecate something, mark it `@Deprecated`, add reasoning in the Javadoc `@deprecated` tag, clean up all usages you can find, and stop there.

Reviewer 3: I'm on the fence with this.
in one way making it Restricted means that plugin authors have to adapt when using new cores and can not miss that a general administrator would be able to perform the action even though they are checking `RUN_SCRIPTS`.

it won't break anything existing.

At the same time you can bypass the annotations so having them deprecated also helps.  and when upgrading Jenkins baseline you have so much deprecated code in your plugin anyway that you would probably miss it.

Could / should we change the permission so that they are actually just the ADMINISTER permission?

```java
/**
 * @deprecated - use #ADMINSITER
 *
*/
@Deprecated
Permission RUN_SCRIPTS = Jenkins.ADMINISTER

```

Reviewer 4: `@Restricted` is the way to hide public members from the public API. This is what we want to do here. We want plugin developers to progressively stop using those permissions (as new plugin releases come), and specially **force new code to not use it**.

However, I agree that it is not semantically correct, as any `@Restricted` API should be removable or incompatibly evolved, and that's not true in this case. 

I wonder if there should be a new annotation to achieve this, something like a hard deprecation to indicate that the API is deprecated and will be marked as `@Restricted` at some point, and finally removed. But this is probably another discussion to have.

Reviewer 5: Perhaps what you desire is `@RestrictedSince` like in https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/blob/b26fff4f37bd6ef3e7788219af05ad03152c1f3d/core/src/main/java/hudson/org/apache/tools/tar/TarInputStream.java#L43-L47.

In addition to the `@Restricted`, you know that the code *was* public somewhere in the past and could break compatibility if removed.

* `Jenkins.RUN_SCRIPTS`
* `Jenkins.CONFIGURE_UPDATECENTER`
* `Jenkins.UPLOAD_PLUGINS`

This allows for backwards compatiblilty with plugins while providing motivation to refactor any usages of the deprecated checks in future releases.

> Actions that formerly checked for these permissions will instead check for `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`.

Reviewer: Does this mean that users with Jenkins.RUN_SCRIPTS permission granted (for example) will not be able to perform these actions until their permissions get upgraded?

Author: Based on my understanding, we will not be breaking compatibility because anyone with `Jenkins.RUN_SCRIPTS` already has `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`.  See [SECURITY-410](https://jenkins.io/security/advisory/2017-04-10/#matrix-authorization-strategy-plugin-allowed-configuring-dangerous-permissions) for details.

@aHenryJard / @EstherAF - can you please sanity check me?

Reviewer 2: In CERT we have generally treated `RUN_SCRIPTS` as the actual ultimate permission in cases where the distinction would have mattered for DEV@cloud users. See [JENKINS-21336](https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/browse/JENKINS-21336).

> Actions that formerly checked for these permissions will instead check for `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`.

Reviewer 2: Do not use the term _actions_. That could be confused with `hudson.model.Action`, which is presumably not what you mean.

Reviewer 2: So which code, concretely, is going to be updated in this fashion? Some of Jenkins core? All of it? Plugins in the recommended list in the setup wizard? Plugins in the suggested list? You need to be explicit about your scope and roadmap here.

> All other actions that check for `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` will be evaluated to determine if the use of the new `Jenkins.CONFIGURE` permission type is appropriate.  The general rule of thumb is that actions which do not let you change the underlying security model (either directly, or through a malicious plugin or groovy script), or change fundamental configurations such as hostnames, proxy configuration, etc are likely candidates to use the `Jenkins.CONFIGURE`.

Reviewer 4: Proxy config could be `Jenkins.CONFIGURE`

Reviewer 6: Seems to imply that we need to refactor the Jenkins configuration page to separate "fundamental configurations" from other configurations?

Author: We are currently considering a separate PR against jenkins to move this proxy configuration out of the the `manage plugins` page

Reviewer 2: What if you change the proxy to point to a malicious machine you control that swaps in Trojan horses for plugin archives?

Author: I had the same thought, in my mind configuring the proxy would require `Jenkins.ADMINSTER` (regardless of where the actual UX lives).

Reviewer 4: UC data is signed. I don't think the man in the middle attack is valid here.

Reviewer 5: > UC data is signed

There are check sums (multiple SHAs versions) for plugins, see https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/blob/40b68eaadbfe452fee3a65eddb41df43851cf993/core/src/main/java/hudson/model/UpdateCenter.java#L1173-L1253
And also signature on the UC metadata: https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/blob/40b68eaadbfe452fee3a65eddb41df43851cf993/core/src/main/java/hudson/model/UpdateCenter.java#L1038

> All other actions that check for `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` will be evaluated to determine if the use of the new `Jenkins.CONFIGURE` permission type is appropriate.  The general rule of thumb is that actions which do not let you change the underlying security model (either directly, or through a malicious plugin or groovy script), or change fundamental configurations such as hostnames, proxy configuration, etc are likely candidates to use the `Jenkins.CONFIGURE`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All other actions that check for `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` will be evaluated to determine if the use of the new `Jenkins.CONFIGURE` permission type is appropriate.  The general rule of thumb is that actions which do not let you change the underlying security model (either directly, or through a malicious plugin or groovy script), or change fundamental configurations such as hostnames, proxy configuration, etc. are likely candidates to use the `Jenkins.CONFIGURE`.
```

> All other actions that check for `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` will be evaluated to determine if the use of the new `Jenkins.CONFIGURE` permission type is appropriate.  The general rule of thumb is that actions which do not let you change the underlying security model (either directly, or through a malicious plugin or groovy script), or change fundamental configurations such as hostnames, proxy configuration, etc are likely candidates to use the `Jenkins.CONFIGURE`.

Reviewer 2: This needs to be fleshed out a lot. For example, does `/configureTools/` need `CONFIGURE` or `ADMINISTER`? After reading the source of `hudson.tools.CommandInstaller` did you change your mind? Or `/computer/`…what about [now](https://jenkins.io/security/advisory/2017-12-06/#arbitrary-shell-command-execution-on-master-by-users-with-agent-related-permissions-in-ec2-plugin)?

> All other actions that check for `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` will be evaluated to determine if the use of the new `Jenkins.CONFIGURE` permission type is appropriate.  The general rule of thumb is that actions which do not let you change the underlying security model (either directly, or through a malicious plugin or groovy script), or change fundamental configurations such as hostnames, proxy configuration, etc. are likely candidates to use the `Jenkins.CONFIGURE`.

Reviewer 3: The rule of thumb is that the configuration being changed should not allow you to escalate to do something that you would not normally be able to do if you just had CONFIGURE.
(I say should because there will be some plugins that have some security issues.)
Thus I think that this needs to be a phased implementation 
1) introduce the new permissions and advertise them (as Preview/Beta?)
2) fixup plugins as bad behaviour is found (probably want to target a subset of the 1000 plugins here!)
3) make the new permission default and deprecate the old ones.

any plugins that make incorrect assumptions should then be treated as security issues.

[]
====

> do we need to talk about the matrix auth plugin here as well?  The new permissions are only applicable if using that so i think we should talk about it.

Reviewer 3: > The new permissions are only applicable if using that so i think we should talk about it.

not true.  there are several auth schemes that can use this.  Role based and matrix in open source and several propriatary ones I know of.

====

== Motivation

[TIP]
====
Explain why the existing code base or process is inadequate to address the problem that the JEP solves.
This section may also contain any historical context such as how things were done before this proposal.

* Do not discuss design choices or alternative designs that were rejected - those belong in the Reasoning section.
====

> The current permission model provides a false sense of security for Jenkins administrators.  The motivation was to allow some users the ability to configure limited aspects of a Jenkins instance without granting them full `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` privileges; however, it is trivial for a motivated user to grant themselves the additional privileges by means of the groovy console (`Jenkins.RUN_SCRIPTS`), or by means of a malicious plugin (`Jenkins.UPLOAD_PLUGINS`, `Jenkins.CONFIGURE_UPDATECENTER`).

Reviewer 3: it is not just that.  An administrator may want to delegation the day to day running of Jenkins without allowing the user who has these delegated permissions to "do bad things"

> The current permission model provides a false sense of security for Jenkins administrators.  The motivation was to allow some users the ability to configure limited aspects of a Jenkins instance without granting them full `Jenkins.ADMINISTRATOR` privileges; however, it is trivial for a motivated user to grant themselves the additional privileges by means of the groovy console (`Jenkins.RUN_SCRIPTS`), or by means of a malicious plugin (`Jenkins.UPLOAD_PLUGINS`, `Jenkins.CONFIGURE_UPDATECENTER`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current permission model provides a false sense of security for Jenkins administrators.  The motivation was to allow some users the ability to configure limited aspects of a Jenkins instance without granting them full `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` privileges; however, it is trivial for a motivated user to grant themselves the additional privileges by means of the groovy console (`Jenkins.RUN_SCRIPTS`), or by means of a malicious plugin (`Jenkins.UPLOAD_PLUGINS`, `Jenkins.CONFIGURE_UPDATECENTER`).
```

> By consolidating all permission types that effectively allow a user to have full `root` access on a Jenkins instance, and introducing a new permission (`Jenkins.CONFIGURE`) that allows a limited amount of access to configure certain non-critical functionality, a Jenkins administrator can safely delegate configuration aspects while being confident that security concerns are being met.

Reviewer 3: this is called out as a side benifit, but it is also one of the motivations here so should be called out separatly IMO.

> The `Jenkins.CONFIGURE` permission type is not intended to replace any `Item` level permissions.  It is solely for the purpose of seperating sensistive, security related Jenkins configuration settings from those that a non-root administrator might be expected to manage.

Reviewer 2: Will the `configuration-as-code` plugin allow someone with only `CONFIGURE` to set those things?

Reviewer 4: CasC sets the config as SYSTEM during start up, so there is no security check at all there. If you mean after Jenkins has started, CasC is not interacting in any way at that point (at least until the read only UI lands, if it lands).

Reviewer 3: I would hope that to use CasC you need Administrator - otherwise you could set the security realm, grant yourself Administer or whatever you wanted...
CasC itself is all-or nothing and is not fine grained enough to support configuring X vs Y.  However I expect that to happen as part of code review process for the code (if today someone has delegated administration to someone via CasC then they have delegated full permissions to that user in any case, they just need to get the code change done and where it is expected and then wait for the next restart of Jenkins)

== Reasoning

[TIP]
====
Explain why particular design decisions were made.
Describe alternate designs that were considered and related work. For example, how the feature is supported in other systems.
Provide evidence of consensus within the community and discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.

* Use sub-headings to organize this section for ease of readability.
* Do not talk about history or why this needs to be done - that is part of Motivation section.
====

=== Consolidating "dangerous" permissions
The permissions that are considered "dangerous" effectively provide the user with the means to grant themselves the "ultimate" permission, `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`, thereby making their existence redundant.  Consolidating these permissions into `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` removes ambiguity concerning what a user is or is not permitted to do.

=== Deprecating "dangerous" permissions vs. removing them

> Due to the large number of plugins available for Jenkins, the decision was made to mark these "dangerous" permissions as `@Deprecated` and `@Restricted(NoExternalUse.class)`.  This will allow for backwards compatibility with existing plugins while minimizing any new usages.  This approach will encourage plugin authors to update their code in future releases that depend upon the new Jenkins Core baseline.

Reviewer 2: Again, use only `@Deprecated`.

== Backwards Compatibility

[TIP]
====
Describe any incompatibilities and their severity.
Describe how the JEP proposes to deal with these incompatibilities.

If there are no backwards compatibility concerns, this section may simply say:
There are no backwards compatibility concerns related to this proposal.
====

> No existing permission types are being removed at this point, which will allow for existing plugins that make use of them to continue to function.  Removing the "dangerous" permissions is outside the scope of this JEP.

Reviewer: Same question than above. The permission are not removed but actions will be requiring ADMINISTER permission....so compatibility will break?

Author: Based on my understanding, we will not be breaking compatibility because anyone with `Jenkins.RUN_SCRIPTS` already has `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`.  See [SECURITY-410](https://jenkins.io/security/advisory/2017-04-10/#matrix-authorization-strategy-plugin-allowed-configuring-dangerous-permissions) for details.

@aHenryJard / @EstherAF - can you please sanity check me?

Reviewer 4: If I understand [this](https://github.com/jenkinsci/matrix-auth-plugin/commit/246d7d744f7280978546fc67e643f2c950713a87) correctly, it means any call to `hasPermission(Jenkins.RUN_SCRIPTS)` is effectively checking for `Jenkins.ADMINISTER`. So they are already requiring it under the hood. So this wouldn't break anything.

== Security

[TIP]
====
Describe the security impact of this proposal.
Outline what was done to identify and evaluate security issues,
discuss potential security issues and how they are mitigated or prevented,
and detail how the JEP interacts with existing elements in Jenkins, such as permissions, authentication, authorization, etc.

If this proposal will have no impact on security, this section may simply say:
There are no security risks related to this proposal.
====

> The intent of this proposal is to improve overall security for Jenkins instances that are using some form of matrix authorization.  All configuration items that require `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` are being reviewed to determine if they can be changed to require the new `Jenkins.CONFIGURE` permission type.  The greatest risk is that some configuration may be _more restrictive_ than necsarry, either because it was overlooked or due to differences in opinion during the review process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The intent of this proposal is to improve overall security for Jenkins instances that are using some form of matrix authorization.  All configuration items that require `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` are being reviewed to determine if they can be changed to require the new `Jenkins.CONFIGURE` permission type.  The greatest risk is that some configuration may be _more restrictive_ than necessary, either because it was overlooked or due to differences in opinion during the review process.
```

In the preferred case that automated tests can be developed to cover all significant changes, simply give a short summary of the nature of these tests.

If some or all of the changes will require human interaction to verify them, explain why automated tests are considered impractical.
Then, summarize what kinds of test cases might be required: user scenarios with action steps and expected outcomes.
Detail whether behavior might be different based on the platform (operating system, servlet container, web browser, etc.)?
Are there foreseeable interactions between different permissible versions of components (Jenkins core, plugins, etc.)?
Does this change require that any special tools, proprietary software, or online service accounts to exercise a related code path (e.g., Active Directory server, GitHub login, etc.)?
When will you complete testing relative to merging code changes, and might retesting be required if other changes are made to this area in the future?

If this proposal requires no testing, this section may simply say:
There are no testing issues related to this proposal.
====

> Existing tests that validate permissions, or make assumptions about the permissions being used will be updated to conform to the new permission model.  Additional tests will be written that validate the new permission type can not be used when the more restrictive `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` is needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Existing tests that validate permissions, or make assumptions about the permissions being used, will be updated to conform to the new permission model.  Additional tests will be written that validate the new permission type cannot be used when the more restrictive `Jenkins.ADMINISTER` is needed.
```

Reviewer 2: I do not understand the second sentence at all.

== Prototype Implementation

[TIP]
====
Link to any open source reference implementation of code changes for this proposal.
The implementation need not be completed before the JEP is

> link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jep/tree/master/jep/1#accepted[accepted],

Reviewer 2: For the JEP to be useful, I would recommend that a basic prototype be in place when the JEP is even proposed for *Draft* status, showing some discrimination of permissions in core and a couple representative plugins, adjustments to config GUI, matching change in `matrix-auth`, etc. This allows the JEP author to convince readers that they have proactively looked for fundamental problems and know how to deal with them, which is not clear from the current draft—there is not enough detail.

(I am all for filing a draft _PR_ in public, the earlier the better. I have never understand this attitude that the company has to review every proposal for OSS improvements in secret before posting a public fait accompli. Seems counterproductive and even condescending.)

Reviewer 3: > I have never understand this attitude that the company has to review every proposal for OSS improvements in secret

because it has historically seen light we as a compnay are not acting with one voice and are disorganised and it looks bad. Granted that could be just an initial this is what we are thinking of doing and why discussion.
